# *Snakemake workflow for TITAN*

## Description
This workflow will run the TITAN a set of tumour-normal pairs, starting from the BAM files and generating TitanCNA outputs.  It will also perform model selection at the end of the workflow to choose the optimal ploidy and clonal cluster solutions.

# Contact
Gavin Ha  
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center  
contact: <gavinha@gmail.com> or <gha@fredhutch.org>  
Date: August 7, 2018  
Website: [GavinHaLab.org](https://gavinhalab.org/)

## Requirements
### Software packages or libraries
 - R-3.3
   - TitanCNA (v1.15.0)
   		- TitanCNA imports: GenomicRanges, dplyr, data.table, doMC
   - [ichorCNA](<https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA>) (v0.1.0) 
   - HMMcopy
   - optparse
   - stringr
   - SNPchip
 - Python 3.4 
   - snakemake-3.12.0
   - PySAM-0.11.2.1
   - PyYAML-3.12
 - samtools v1.3.1
 - bcftools v1.1
 - [HMMcopy Suite](<http://shahlab.ca/projects/hmmcopy_utils/>).  
 		-In particular, `readCounter` is used.

### Scripts/executables
 - readCounter (C++ executable; HMMcopy Suite)
 - ichorCNA.R (ichorCNA tool for normalizing and correcting read coverage)
 - [countPysam.py](code/countPysam.py) (generates input allele counts)
 - [titanCNA.R](../R_scripts/titanCNA.R) (main R script to run TitanCNA)
 - [selectSolution.R](../R_scripts/selectSolution.R) (R script to select optimal solution for each sample)

## Tumour-Normal sample list
The list of tumour-normal paired samples should be defined in a YAML file.  See `config/samples.yaml` for an example.  Both fields `samples` and `pairings` must to be provided.  `pairings` key must match the tumour sample while the value must match the normal sample.
```
samples:
  tumor_sample_1:  /path/to/bam/tumor.bam
  normal_sample_1:  /path/to/bam/normal.bam


pairings:
  tumor_sample_1:  normal_sample_1
```

## snakefiles
1. `ichorCNA.snakefile`
2. `getAlleleCounts.snakefile`
3. `TitanCNA.snakefile`

### [config.yaml](config/config.yaml)
See below for details about [config/config.yaml](config/config.yaml)

# Run the analysis
## 1. Invoking the full snakemake workflow for TITAN
This will also run both `ichorCNA.snakefile` and `getAlleleCounts.snakefile` which generate the necessary inputs for `TitanCNA.snakfile`.
```
# show commands and workflow
snakemake -s TitanCNA.snakefile -np
# run the workflow locally using 5 cores
snakemake -s TitanCNA.snakefile --cores 5
```

## 2. Run snakemake jobs on a cluster  
An implementation that works with Broad UGER (qsub) is provided.  
Parameters for memory, runtime, and parallel environment can be specified directly in the snakemake files; default values for each rule has already been set in `params` within the [config.yaml](config/config.yaml) and the command below can be used as-is.  
Other cluster parameters can be set directly in [cluster.sh](config/cluster.sh).  
*Note: users will need to adjust these for use with their cluster-specific settings*
```
snakemake -s TitanCNA.snakefile --cluster-sync "qsub -l h_vmem={params.mem},h_rt={params.runtime} {params.pe}" -j 50 --jobscript config/cluster.sh
```

## 3. Invoking individual steps in the workflow
Users can run the snakemake files individually. This can be helpful for testing each step or if you only wish to generate results for a particular step. The snakefiles need to be run in this same order since input files are generated by the previous steps.
  ### a. [ichorCNA.snakefile](ichorCNA.snakefile)
  i.	Compute read counts for non-overlapping bins of a specified size. This step uses [HMMcopy](http://shahlab.ca/projects/hmmcopy_utils/)'s readCounter
  ii.   Run [ichorCNA](https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA) analysis to generate normalized read coverage-based copy number. For male samples, chrX results will be used from this step.  
  ```
  snakemake -s ichorCNA.snakefile -np
  snakemake -s ichorCNA.snakefile --cores 5
  # OR
  snakemake -s ichorCNA.snakefile --cluster-sync "qsub -l h_vmem={params.mem},h_rt={params.runtime} {params.pe}" -j 50 --jobscript config/cluster.sh
  ```
  Note: This snakefile for ichorCNA is specific for TitanCNA and may differ from the snakemake workflow on https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA
  
  ### b. [getAlleleCounts.snakefile](getAlleleCounts.snakefile) 
  i.   Applies [samtools](http://samtools.sourceforge.net/) mpileup command to extract heterozygous SNP sites. The sites that overlap a SNP database are kept. Here is an example of a database (VCF format) that users can use:  [hapmap_3.3.hg38.vcf.gz](https://storage.cloud.google.com/genomics-public-data/resources/broad/hg38/v0/hapmap_3.3.hg38.vcf.gz?_ga=2.110868357.-1633399588.1531762721).
  ii.   Extract the allelic read counts from the tumor bam file, parallelized by each chromosome.  
  iii.	Combine the allelic read counts from each chromosome file into a single counts file.
  ```
  snakemake -s getAlleleCounts.snakefile -np
  snakemake -s getAlleleCounts.snakefile --cores 5
  # OR
  snakemake -s getAlleleCounts.snakefile --cluster-sync "qsub -l h_vmem={params.mem},h_rt={params.runtime} {params.pe}" -j 50 --jobscript config/cluster.sh
  ``` 
  ### c. [TitanCNA.snakefile](TitanCNA.snakefile)
  i.   Run the [TitanCNA](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA) analysis and generates solutions for different ploidy initializations and each clonal cluster.  
  ii.  Merge results with ichorCNA output generate by [ichorCNA.snakefile](ichorCNA.snakefile) and post-processes copy number results.  
  iii. Select optimal solution for each samples and copies these to a new folder. The parameters are compiled in a text file.  

# Configuration and settings
All settings for the workflow are contained in [config/config.yaml](config/config.yaml). The settings are organized by paths to scripts and reference files and then by each step in the workflow.

### 1. Path to tools
samTools is used by (getAlleleCounts.snakefile)[getAlleleCounts.snakefile].
```
samTools:  /path/to/samtools
```

### 2. Path to scripts
These are provided in this (TitanCNA)[https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA] repo either under [code/](code/) or [R_scripts](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA/tree/master/scripts/R_scripts). 
```
readCounterScript:  /path/to/readCounter
ichorCNA_rscript:  (/path/to/ichorCNA.R)[https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA/blob/master/scripts/runIchorCNA.R]
pyCountScript:  code/countPysam.py
TitanCNA_rscript: ../R_scripts/titanCNA.R
TitanCNA_selectSolutionRscript: ../R_scripts/selectSolution.R
```

### 3. Path to R package files
Specify the directory in which [TitanCNA](https://github.com/gavinha/TitanCNA) and [ichorCNA](https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA) are installed.  
*Set these if the R files in these libraries have been modified or updated but not yet installed or updated in R*.
```
TitanCNA_libdir:  ../../R/
ichorCNA_libdir:  /path/to/ichorCNA/ ## optional
```

### 4. Reference files and settings
Global reference files used by many of the `snakefiles` and scripts.  
- `snpVCF` you can download the HapMap file (used for filtering heterozygous SNPs) here: https://console.cloud.google.com/storage/browser/genomics-public-data/resources/broad/hg38/v0  
- `genomeStyle` specifies the chromosome naming convention to used for **output** files. Input files can be any convention as long as it is the same genome build. Only use `UCSC` (e.g. chr1) or `NCBI` (e.g. 1). 
- `sex` set to `male` or `female`, otherwise `None` if both females and males are in sample set.
- `cytobandFile` Only used for hg38! Coordinates for plotting the idiogram. The file is found in the (ichorCNA repo)[https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA/blob/master/inst/extdata/cytoBand_hg38.txt]
```
genomeBuild: hg38
genomeStyle:  UCSC
refFasta: /path/to/Homo_sapiens_assembly38.fasta
snpVCF:  /path/to/hapmap_3.3.hg38.vcf.gz 
cytobandFile:  data/cytoBand_hg38.txt # only need if hg38
centromere:  /path/to/ichorCNA/inst/extdata/GRCh38.GCA_000001405.2_centromere_acen.txt
sex:  male   # use None if both females and males are in sample set
```

### 5. Cluster resource parameter settings
If you are using a cluster, then these are resource settings for memory and runtime limits, and parallel environments.  
These are the default settings for all tasks that do not have rule-specific resources.  
*Note that these settings are used for the Broad's UGER cluster so users will need to modify this for their own clusters.*
```
# invoke using: snakemake -s TitanCNA.snakefile --cluster-sync "qsub -l h_vmem={params.mem},h_rt={params.runtime} {params.pe}" -j 200 --jobscript config/cluster.sh
std_mem:  4G # memory limit
std_runtime:  "05:00:00" # runtime limit
std_numCores:  -pe smp 1 -binding linear:1  # use one core 
```

### 6. readCounter settings
Settings for the computing read coverage using `readCounter`.  
- `chrs` Used by readCounter command line tool. Please comment out the chromosome naming convention that you do not wish to use.
- `binSize` Various bin sizes can be used in the analysis. 
```
## readCounter params ##
# use this for NCBI chr naming
chrs: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,X,Y 
# use this for UCSC chr naming
#chrs: chr1,chr2,chr3,chr4,chr5,chr6,chr7,chr8,chr9,chr10,chr11,chr12,chr13,chr14,chr15,chr16,chr17,chr18,chr19,chr20,chr21,chr22,chrX,chrY 
binSize:  10000
```

### 7. [ichorCNA.snakefile](ichorCNA.snakefile) settings
Settings for the analysis of read coverage using ichorCNA.  
- `ichorCNA_chrs` specifies the chromosomes to analyze in the R script; users do not need to be concerned about chromosome naming convention here as the code will handle it based on the `genomeStyle` set in the reference settings above.  
- The GC and Map wig files *must* have match the `binSize` above. The various sizes supported will depend on which GC and Map wig files are generated.  We provide a few to select from in the (ichorCNA repo)[https://github.com/broadinstitute/ichorCNA/tree/master/inst/extdata]. Users can also create their own by following instructions from the [HMMcopy repo](http://shahlab.ca/projects/hmmcopy_utils/).
```
## ichorCNA params ##
ichorCNA_gcWig: /path/to/gc_hg19_10kb.wig
ichorCNA_mapWig:  /path/to/map_hg19_10kb.wig
ichorCNA_chrs:  c(1:22, \"X\")
ichorCNA_normal:  c(0.5)  
ichorCNA_ploidy:  c(2,3)  
ichorCNA_estimateNormal:  TRUE
ichorCNA_estimatePloidy:  TRUE
ichorCNA_estimateClonality: TRUE
ichorCNA_scStates:  c(1,3)
ichorCNA_maxCN:  8
ichorCNA_includeHOMD: FALSE
ichorCNA_txnE:  0.9999
ichorCNA_txnStrength:  10000
ichorCNA_plotFileType:  png
ichorCNA_plotYlim:  c(-2,4)
ichorCNA_mem:  10G
ichorCNA_runtime:  "300:00:00"
ichorCNA_pe: -pe smp 1 -binding linear:1  
```

### 7. [getAlleleCounts.snakefile](getAlleleCounts.snakefile) settings: Tumor allelic counts 
Minimum thresholds used when extracting read counts from the tumor BAM file at heterozygous SNP sites. In addition, the `vcf_quality` of the heterozygous SNP site from the matched normal sample is also used in the filtering.
Note: Users must modify [getAlleleCounts.snakefile](getAlleleCounts.snakefile) to set the appropriate chromosome naming convention for `samtools` and the `countPysam.py` script. Comment out line 6 if using `UCSC` or comment out line 8 when using `NCBI`.
```
# USERS MUST MODIFY getAlleleCounts.snakefile to use the correct CHRS naming
map_quality:  10
base_quality: 10
vcf_quality:  100

```

### 8. [TitanCNA.snakefile](TitanCNA.snakefile) settings
Most settings can be left as default.  
- `TitanCNA_maxNumClonalClusters` specifies the maximum number of clonal clusters to consider. For example, if set to 5, then 5 solutions are generated, each one considering a different number of cluster(s).  
- `TitanCNA_maxPloidy` specifies the maximum ploidy to initialize. This be set to either `2` (only considers diploid solutions), `3` (considers diploid and triploid, and usually accounts for tetraploid), or `4` (for diploid, triploid, tetraploid or higher ploidies). Usually, `3` is suitable for most samples unless you know that your samples are tetraploid or even higher. For example, if set to `3`, then solutions for diploid and triploid will be generated. [code/selectSolution.R](code/selectSolution.R) will try to select the optimal solution; however, users should inspect to make sure results are accurate.  
- `TitanCNA_numCores` specifies the number of cores to use on a single machine. `TitanCNA_pe` should also be set as to be consistent.
```
TitanCNA_maxNumClonalClusters: 2
TitanCNA_chrs:  c(1:22, \"X\")
TitanCNA_normalInit: 0.5
TitanCNA_maxPloidy: 3
TitanCNA_estimateNormal:  map
TitanCNA_estimatePloidy:  TRUE
TitanCNA_estimateClonality: TRUE
TitanCNA_alleleModel: binomial
TitanCNA_alphaK:  10000
TitanCNA_alphaR:  10000
TitanCNA_txnExpLen: 1e15
TitanCNA_plotYlim:  c(-2,4)
TitanCNA_solutionThreshold: 0.05
TitanCNA_numCores: 1
TitanCNA_mem:  16G
TitanCNA_runtime:  "300:00:00"
TitanCNA_pe: -pe smp 1 -binding linear:1  
```




